# C# Language Design Notes for Mar 19, 2018

***Warning: These are raw notes, and still need to be cleaned up. Read at your own peril!***

## Agenda

Triage

# 7.3 

Moved undone 7.3 features to 8.0.

# Allow default in deconstruction

We allowed for `==`, so it seems we should also allow it for assignment and initialization.

Should probably not require `ValueTuple`, but that's more of a compiler thing.


## Conclusion

The feature is a good idea. Even though it's simple, we should not rush it into 7.3. 8.0.

``` c#
case Customer { MiddleName: "" or null }
```

# and, or and not patterns 1350
`not` feels useful. `and` is hard to come up with scenarios for. `or` has more scenarios, but may be better served by a `in { 1, 2, 3 }` style pattern.

``` c#
if (x is not string s) { ... }
else { ... /* s */ }
```

`not` would cause definite assignment to "flip". Should `s` be disallowed in a `not` pattern. 

The `{}` pattern for not null is a bit cryptic. `not null` would certainly be more direct.

## Conclusion

Punt to 8.x, when we know more of the rest of the pattern story.


# partial type inference #1349

We've talked about this many times in the past, but couldn't settle on a syntax that was nice enough and worth its while.

A 4th option: allow M<string>(...) to match an M with more type parameters. But that probably goes against intuition and would complicate overload resolution.

For 2: Just commas is known from typeof, so that concept is already in the language, though you can't mix "there" and "not there" today.

## Conclusion

8.X is when we'll look at it again.


# Permit `t is null` for unconstrained type parameter #1284

For null we special case type parameters in all other kinds of places, so this is the only place where you can't.

Also, `t is 3`. We allow *type* patterns, but not constant patterns.

## Conclusion

Absolutely should do this. Mark as 8.0.


# Implicitly scoped using #114 #1174

We have sympathy for this syntactic sugar, and we'd be interested in allowing it. It seems related to similar features, such as "defer" statements (avoids nesting `try/finally`). 

Also fits nicely with the work we already did with expression variable scoping.

Also namespace without curlies, where you just say `namespace X.Y;` and it's in force for the remainder of the file.

## Conclusion

Discuss at 8.X. Could gewt pulled up to 8.0.
Let's also put defer and namespace into 8.X for consideration then.

# User-defined positional patterns

A next step from recursive patterns.

## Conclusion

Let's revisit in 8.X when recursive patterns have played out.




