# C# Language Design Notes for Aug 16, 2017

***Warning: These are raw notes, and still need to be cleaned up. Read at your own peril!***

"It's an open question whether we go out with a bang`!`"

## Agenda




# The dammit operator

Proposal:

1. *Target typed*: `e!` implicitly converts to `T` if `e` does, but without nullability warnings
	- `string s = null!;`
	- `string s = default!`
	- `string s = GetNameOrNull()!;`
	- `List<string> l = GetList<string?>()!;`
	- `List<string?> l = GetList<string>()!;`
2. *Inherent type*: if the type of `e` is a nullable reference type `T?`, then the inherent type of `e!` is `T`
	- `var s = GetNameOrNull()!;`
	- `GetNameOrNull()!.Length;`
3. *Default expressions*: if `T` is a non-nullable reference type, then `default(T)!` suppresses the warning normally given by `default(T)`

For 2, an alternative is to have a dedicated `!.` and `![...]` operator, cousins of `?.` and `?[...]`. Then you wouldn't get to factor out to a local with `var`.

3 is a bit of a corner case. Most people would choose to just rewrite it to something else - there are plenty of options. But `default(T)` is a good strategy for code generators.

We could generalize to `!` silencing all nullability warnings even in subexpressions. No.

If `!` is applied in a place that yields no nullability warnings, does that lead to a warning? No.

We can make `!!` and error. If you really want to (we don't believe there's *any* scenario, other than swearing) you can parenthesize, `(e!)!`.

An alternative is to make the type of `e!` oblivious, if we choose to embrace a notion of oblivious. That's attractive in that it makes a type for "something that doesn't yield warnings", but it's also viral - could lead to many things not being checked. Option to be considered in future.


# Discussion about var and the type of nullable things known not to be null

``` c#
T t = ...;

if (t != null)
{
    int s = t.ToString();
}

string? s = ...;
var s1 = s;

if (s != null)
{
    var s2 = s;
	int l = s.Length;
}
```


``` c#
string s1 = "Hello";
var s2 = s1; // 
```

This could be safe:

``` c#
void M1(ref string s);
void M2(ref string? s);

var s = "foo";

if (s == null);
{
	M1(ref s);
}
else
{
	M2(ref s);
}
```

Three discussions:

1. What is the type of the value of a local variable `string? s` in a scope where it is known to be non-null? Does it contribute the type `string` to e.g. type inference, or does it remain `string?`
2. What is the meaning of `var`? Does it infer its nullability along with the rest of its type, from the initializer, or does it remain able to be assigned `null` even when initializer is not-null?
3. Should we reconsider completely abandoning the notion of nullness being part of a local's type at the top level? 
	1. could even consider for value parameters

``` c#
T M<T>(T t);

string? s = "abc";
var l = M(s).Length;
```











# Type inference

Proposal:

- Consider nullness an orthogonal aspect to the rest of the type being inferred
- If any contributing type is nullable, that should contribute nullness to the inference
- A `null` literal expression should contribute nullness to the inference, even though it doesn't otherwise contribute to the type


# Structs with fields of non-nullable type

Structs can be created without going through a declared constructor, all fields being set to their default value. If those fields are of non-nullable reference type, their default value will still be null!

It seems we can chase this in three ways:

1. Not at all. We just aren't that ambitious.
2. We warn on all fields of structs that have non-nullable reference types. That's a *lot*! How do you "fix" it? Make them nullable? No version of the `!` operator works here, since the whole point is you don't control initialization from user code.
3. We warn whenever a struct that has such fields is created as a default value. In other words, we treat the type the same as a non-null reference type, recursively. (And we warn on passing for a type parameter constrained by `new()` or `struct`?)


# Dotted names problems


