# C# Language Design Notes for Mar 28, 2017

***Raw notes, yet to be cleaned up - read at your own peril***

## Agenda

Design remaining 7.1 features

# Default

`expr is default` 

It would not be a place where `null` and `default` mean different things, because `null` wouldn't be allowed there (doesn't convert to the type of the lhs).

Brittle wrt the type of the expr. But we already have that with `0`, for instance, which is int `0` always, *except* when the context is some other numeric or enum type.

We'll leave it allowed wherever `null` is allowed as a pattern, as well as wherever `default` is a constant when converted to the type of the lhs.

## `case default:`

Should this be legal? It is probably a mistake. Make it a warning. Just that particular syntactic thing. You can put parens around it, or write default(T), etc.


# permit match of expr of type T:base with derived

Today `x as T` is allowed if 

1. there is a reasonable relationship between the left and right type, or
2. one of them is an open type

But for the `is` operator we don't have 2. That means that we can't always replace uses of `as` followed by null check with an `is` with a type pattern.

Also, the restrictions are supposed to rule out only obviously useless cases, whereas some of these are demonstrably useful.

Let's allow it, look again if there are unexpected problems.


# Better common type

Best common type should combine a value type with null literal to get a nullable value type.

``` c#
b1 ? 1 : b2 ? null : b3 ? 2 : default; // default is 0
b1 ? 1 : b2 ? default : b3 ? 2 : null; // default is null

b1 ? 1 : (b2 ? null : (b3 ? 2 : default)); // default is 0
b1 ? 1 : (b2 ? default : (b3 ? 2 : null)); // default is null
```

This is weird, but fine.

``` c#
M(1, default, null); // int?
```

Next step is trying to spec it. It's a bit complicated.

``` c#
M(myShort, myNullableInt, null); Should continue to infer int? , not short?
```
# Lambda discards

# Mix

# Expr vars in initializers