# C# Language Design Meeting for April 14th, 2025

## Agenda

- [Dictionary expressions](#dictionary-expressions)  
- [Collection expression arguments](#collection-expression-arguments)  

## Discussion

### Dictionary expressions

Champion issue: https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/issues/8887  
Specification: https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/e2e62a49d32f0d659b8baf0f23ee211b69563c65/proposals/dictionary-expressions.md#open-questions  

#### Parsing ambiguity

Should `[a ? [b] : c]` be parsed as `[a ? ([b]) : (c)]` or `[(a?[b]) : c]`?

##### Conclusion

Parse as `[a ? ([b]) : (c)]`. If the user intends to use the conditional operator, they can use parentheses and `[(a?[b]) : c]`.

#### Implement non-generic `IDictionary` when targeting `IReadOnlyDictionary<,>`

The existing types we might use to implement `IReadOnlyDictionary` implement `IDictionary` and implementing the interface on future types is not onerous.

##### Conclusion

The type used when target typing `IReadOnlyDictionary<,>` should implement IDictionary.

### Collection expression arguments

Champion issue: https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/issues/8887  
Specification: https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/e2e62a49d32f0d659b8baf0f23ee211b69563c65/proposals/collection-expression-arguments.md#open-questions  

#### Target types where arguments are required

Types that require at least one argument in all constructors and factory methods can't be used for `params` collections. We discussed whether conversions should be supported for collection expressions for these types.

We also discussed whether to require the presence of `with` to allow these conversions.

##### Conclusion

Yes, conversions will be supported.
Yes, require `with` to allow these conversions.

#### Arguments for interface types

For concrete types, we support the arguments available on constructors or factory methods. 

But, should we support arguments for interface target types, and if so, what method signatures should be used binding the arguments.

Using the available constructors may result in signatures that are not particularly helpful. For example, when using including a collection in a collection expression, a spread operator seems more clear than a `with` parameter. And  depending on the types involved, what's allowed may be unexpected:

```csharp
List<int> list1  = [with(otherList)]; // allowed.
IList<int> list2 = [with(otherList)]; // not allowed.
IList<int> list3 = (List<int>)[with(otherList)]; // allowed.
```

There are a small number of constructor args that are very useful in collection expressions, such as:

- Capacity and comparer for mutable (the capacity might change)
- Comparer only for immutable (we know the capacity)

Now that we understand the implications of a generalized solution for comparer and capacity, we are less certain that the generalized solution is the correct approach - so we will reconsider this. The team will explore what arguments are useful and return with a curated list and recommendation. We can add support for additional arguments as use cases arise.

#### __arglist

We see very little value in supporting `__arglist` in collection expression arguments.

##### Conclusion

We will not support `__arglist` unless they are "free" to support.
