ref fields to ref struct
===

# Terminology
RFRS: `ref` field to `ref struct`

# TypedReference
All the discussion on RFRS is tied to how we eventually fully support `TypedReference` (remove it from restricted types list). The reason is that `TypedReference` can support storing anything. It can even store a `ref TypedReference` value which makes it equivalent to a type that has RFRS. 

The language does not necessarily need to support this full complexity though. One simplification is that we only limit the arguments passed to `__makeref` to be those we logically support on `ref struct` fields today. That would allow `ref struct` values, or `ref` to normal `struct`, but not `ref` to `ref struct`. This means IL could construct instances that violate C# lifetime rules but that would be labeled as simply unsupported.

However until we know how RFRS support will occur it's difficult to move forward with `TypedReference` support for fear we'd end up painting ourselves into a corner.

# Lifetime notation 
When discussing `ref` and the associated lifetime challenges it helps to have an explicit notation syntax to fall back on for discussions. That will be done by using the `'a` notation. The letter following `'` is the lifetime name and it can be applied to any value or `ref` in code. By default named lifetimes have no relationship to each other but one can be created by adding `lifetime` constraints at the method body. 

For example here is how the use of `scoped` is expressed in lifetime notation 

```csharp
Span<int> Read(scoped ref int i) {
    ...
}

'b Span<int> Read('a ref 'b int i) {

}
```

In this case `scoped` becomes the `'a` lifetime. That enforces the behavior of `scoped` because the lifetime for returns is `'b`. There is no provided relationship between `'a` and `'b` hence no conversion and it cannot be returned. 

The *return only* vs. *containing method* scopes can be explained using the following example:

```csharp
ref struct RS { }
Span<int> Create(ref RS i) {
    ...
}

'b Span<int> Create('b ref 'a RS i) {
    where 'b <= 'a

}
```

By establishing a relationship between `'a` and `'b` it allows for both the value and the `ref` to be return from the method. It also prevents cyclic assignment issues because the relationship does not allow for it from a lifetime (`'b` could be smaller than `'a`).

# Complications around ref fields of ref struct
The immediate issue this causes is it creates layers of lifetimes in our types. Consider concretely: 

```csharp
ref struct RS { 
  ref 'a Span<byte> Field; 
}
```

The value of the field has a lifetime that is independent of the containing instance. Typically when we look at a value there are two lifetimes to consider: the safe to escape and ref safe to escape. In the case of `RS` though there is also the lifetime of `Field`. 

```csharp
void E() {  
    // Only two lifetimes here: the value and the ref 
    Span<int> span = ...; 

    // Three lifetimes: value, ref and value of Field
    RS rs = ...;
}
```

These lifetimes can now be arbitrarily deep. So a given struct can have `N` different lifetimes associated with it that we have to manage.  As the types get more fields this gets more complex because the lifetimes aren't necessarily linear either: 

```csharp
ref struct RS { 
  ref Span<byte> Field1;
  ref Span<byte> Field2;
}
``` 

There are two different ways we could think about this: 

```csharp
// Option 1: simple but limiting
ref struct RS { 
  ref 'a Span<byte> Field1;
  ref 'a Span<byte> Field2;
}
// Option 2: flexible but now we have a tree
ref struct RS { 
  ref 'a Span<byte> Field1;
  ref 'b Span<byte> Field2;
}
```

These problems mostly manifest in the method arguments must match rule. This is the rule where we look at all of the `ref` going into the method and ensure that they can never be cross assigned in a way that would cause an unsafe reference to the stack. 

```csharp
void Swap(ref Span<int> x, ref Span<int> y) {
    ... 
}

void Use(ref Span<int> span) {
    Span<int> local = stackalloc int[42];
    Swap(ref span, ref local);
}
```
The MAMM rules are intricate but can be simplified to the following: 

> Every `ref` argument to a method be assignable *from* every other `ref` argument in terms of lifetimes. 

Before there were just two layers of lifetimes, now there are basically infinite and they **all** have to match. The problem with `ref` fields to `ref struct` is now virtually everything is a MAMM nightmare. Even an instance method on a `struct` is dealing with MAMM insanity.

The only way for MAMM to work in this scenario is for all the lifetimes involved to be equivalent. That really defeats the purpose of adding them. 

# Paths Forward 

## Implement RFRS
The concensus is that to fully support RFRS would likely require us to have full lifetime notations in the langauge. For example putting the lifetimes on `scoped` modifier. That would allow for example `scoped<a>`, `scoped<b>`, etc ... 

At the same time, we don't have the supporting scenarios at this time to justify that work. It's possible that features like `params ReadOnlySpan<T>` will produce these. 

## Implement RFRS in a limited fashion
Much of the complexity of RFRS comes from the fields being as flexible as a `ref` parameter. The ability to ref re-assign, assign new values, etc ... drive the complexity particularly around MAMM. Perhaps if we limited their capabilities we could satisfy key scenarios without jumping off the complexity cliff. For example if we forced them to be `readonly ref`, `ref scoped`, etc ... would that help? 

The `ref scoped` is likely the most plausible approach here. The key is whether we can define its meaning in such a way that it remains useful while keeping complexity low. The rules would also need to apply to `ref scoped` parameters too which increase the scenarios a bit.

## Punt it 
The explicit decision to not support RFRS for now should open the door for us exploring `ref struct` as generic arguments and implementing interfaces. There are existing scenarios that will sufficiently help drive this feature. 

Need to do some more dilegence to be certain that we don't close the door on RFRS in the future. 

# Next Steps

1. Andy and Aaron are going to provide simplified samples where RFRS would be beneficial. 
2. Group will explore if there are ways to expose them in a limited way that does not force us off the complexity cliff. For example if they are required to be `readonly ref`, or `ref scoped` can be defined with sufficient restrictions, etc ... Do any of these both allow the scenarios that matter without forcing off the complexity cliff of full lifetime notations.
3. Explore whether we can go forward with `ref struct` generics + interfaces without cutting off our ability to support RFRS at a later time

